Here's a detailed thread explaining how the weekly ONS data should be interpreted when monitoring all cause mortality and excess deaths. It seems very common for people to misinterpret the data relating to excess deaths so I will do my best to clarify in a series of tweets.  1/10

The ONS releases weekly death figures every Tue for registrations up to the Friday 11 days prior. On top of that it takes about 4 days to register a death so it is really deaths up to ~15 days prior. Bank holiday have a big impact on registrations, causing dips and spikes.  2/10

A clearer view is based on the date of registration. I'll link to an explanation of my modelling at the bottom of the thread but two things you should observe. 1) First wave had a lot of non-COVID excess deaths. 2) Second wave is significantly higher than the 5 year range.  3/10

It should be apparent that non-COVID deaths during Nov + Dec were slightly lower than the 5 year range. Check the previous image to see that it was far less significant than the excess. Countries who locked down and had few COVID deaths saw similar - e.g. Australia and NZ.  4/10

Now to PHE daily excess mortality in the weekly flu + COVID report. This is created from daily registrations, adjusted for the likely delays. The most recent data is incomplete because of reporting lags. Daily data is noisy and averaging 3SD from baseline is highly unusual.  5/10

Sticking with the PHE data you must be cautious when comparing it against COVID deaths. 1) A third of the height of the first wave was non-COVID excess. 2) The second wave is starting from below the 5y baseline. 3) You're only seeing realistic figures prior to mid-Dec.  6/10

The recent surge in hospitalisations started in Dec and deaths started to rise mid-Dec. The numbers currently visibile in the ONS and PHE data are prior to the start of the surge and not apparent yet. Over the next 2-3 weeks the surge will be very clear in ONS + PHE data.  7/10

Figures that we see reported on a daily basis deaths within 28 days of +ve test. ONS figures are based on death certificates but the two sets of numbers match very closely. Doctors are required by *law* to complete certificates “to the best of their knowledge and belief”.  8/10

If you are using the ONS + PHE data to assess excess deaths that are happening now you are using the wrong data. The impact of recent weeks will only become apparent in future reports from the ONS + PHE. If anyone has told you to use the ONS + PHE data now they are wrong!  9/10

If you are interested in the details of how I modelled the first wave they can be found in this document. I used my model for the first wave and the weekly ONS model for deaths following the first wave and the second wave.  https://logiqx.github.io/ons-stats/data_prep   10/10